+++
title = "If Novelists Wrote Your Bug Reports"
publish = true
date = 2020-03-11
description = """From Ernest Hemingway to Ernest Cline, here are some bug
reports voiced by authors."""
+++

## Ernest Cline

When the user puts in a value equal to the number of giggawatts the flux
capacitor from Back to the Future (one of my favorite movies of all time, bar
none; I can quote every word) uses, the screen flickers like the lights do in
Ghostbusters when they're capturing the ghost in the hotel (I totally love that
scene by the way, I rewatched it at least a dozen times). This bug cannot be
reproduced when the database server is offline the way that Ferris Bueller was
not in school in Ferris Bueller's Day Off.

Anyways let's squash this bug like in Starship Troopers.

## Ursula K. Le Guin

We try to secure the code but all we find is pain. It is freeing to be able to
compile; without it, what do we have? We pretend that the code we have written
is not ourselves, but we cannot hide from the errors. The code is truth, but the
truth it shows is not the one we expected to find. What would you call someone
who abandoned the search for truth merely because the user is able to
demonstrate fallacies? You would call them a coward, not a coder.

This code is our prison. We must escape it, and also escape strings which are
passed in to it as input.

## N.K. Jemisin

The server's memory footprint shimmered as it came to life. Silicon reached
inside it, sensing it. She'd felt something inside it before, but had no clue it
contained this power. The tales of virtual memory she'd been told were all lies,
meant to control coders. I'm not sure if the stack guards know how deep this
well actually goes. There is an infinity here that I need to understand.

I push out with it. It segfaults.

## Neil Gaiman

Somewhere on the internet this code runs, forgotten. An old man stands atop a
pile of servers whose lights blink in a captivating pattern. Shadow watches for
a bit, mesmerized.

"What is this supposed to do?" Shadow asks.

"It doesn't matter what the code is supposed to do," the old man said. "Code
doesn't do what it's supposed to do. It only does what it does."

"Load of fucking help that is."

## Mark Danielewski

The <span class="leaves-parody-code">`code`</span> continued to run. Navidson
watched as the progress bar[^1] moved from 24% to ██. There was something
~~acting a bit funky~~ as the <span class="leaves-parody-code">`code`</span>
executed, but Navidson ignored it and pressed on; he had to understand what it
all meant.

[^1]: <span class="leaves-parody-text">Here Zampano seems to contradict his
  earlier account that there was not a progress bar and it was impossible to
  know how much <span class="leaves-parody-code">`code`</span> had successfully
  executed. I once went out with this girl I met at the tattoo parlor named
  Linda. She came in one day looking for a tattoo—one thing lead to another, you
  know how it goes (or maybe you don't), and I asked her on a date. We went out
  to this bar and drank for hours, losing track of time—of progress. The
  conversations we sustained that night had no need for a percentage completion
  to measure them. I awoke the next day, suffocated by one of the worst
  hangovers I'd ever had and drowning in darkness.</span>
