+++
title = "A New Dream of the Old Web"
publish = true
date = 2020-02-03
description = """Are screens really killing us? It's clear the internet is \
changing, and that some of those changes are hostile. We can fix it."""
+++

I grew up on the internet, and I've watched it change in so many ways. I hear
the soothsayers cry out about its impending death. If I'm being entirely
honest, I share most of the underlying concerns being expressed—except for one.
I don't believe the internet is dying. It's just going through adolescence.

## In Defense of Screens

Growing up online doesn't strike me as dramatically different from most
coming-of-age cliches. There was awkward flirting, telling all my friends about
a new favorite band on a monthly basis, and hours of conversations that felt
like the deepest and most serious things in the world; it's just that mine were
mostly captured in AIM chat logs[^1]. I'd bounce around random websites I found,
read blogs, or fall into a wiki black hole. The internet represented pure
freedom—not just because the content was free, but because it felt like the
space belonged to us.

As I got older, it wasn't just a space to hang out with my IRL friends. I met
people on web forums, IRC channels, and MUDs. I wrote and shared stories, and
got feedback from people who were writers in real life. I asked questions about
how computers worked and got answers from professional software engineers[^2].
I met people my own age who lived in different states and countries. Alongside
all these friends I designed entire worlds, shared music videos and funny
animations I enjoyed, and played games, and most of all, just chatted.

The modern consensus is that screens are supposed to be bad for us. The
internet is ruining our attention spans, causing constant FOMO, and making kids
anti-social. Everywhere I look, I see signs that this is correct, but I don't
buy that it's an inherent consequence of being online. The internet of the
mid-2000s did none of this to me. I had deep conversations online that took my
entire focus[^3]. I wasn't missing out, I was finding new things to experience.
Socializing was the point.

So what went wrong?

[^1]: Mercifully, those have been lost to time.

[^2]: It was through these conversations that I learned that "Computer Science"
    was a thing I could major in at college and that programming was a job I
    could have as an adult.

[^3]: There's a scene in the video game _Emily is Away Too_ that captures this
    feeling perfectly, where you're in two intense conversations at once and
    are eventually forced to abandon one to focus on the other.

## Dark Patterns

The internet we have today appears superficially similar, but a lot has
changed. Facebook is like MySpace except there's no custom HTML or CSS so all
the content looks exactly the same. Messaging apps are like AIM except without
fun away messages or font colors, and you can't use an external client. Slack
and Discord are like IRC except there's always history from when you weren't
online making it hard not to spend tons of time trying to "catch up" instead of
just dropping in on the current conversations. Reddit is like...well, early
Reddit, except more of the content seems to be self-posts, imgur hosted images,
and giphy hosted gifs that keep you browsing on Reddit.

In the meantime, [dark patterns](https://www.darkpatterns.org/) and a drive to
improve metrics has corrupted what we once had. Facebook and Twitter's content
distribution algorithms have replaced the serendipity of real-time updates.
Google's ads are increasingly trying to blend in with native search results and
now frequently take up more than half of the first page of results.
Wikia/Fandom has actively murdered niche content wikis, often against their
will[^4], and no one seems to care.

And then there's the things that are just gone. I don't really think there's a
good modern alternative to StumbleUpon for just wasting time. Google Reader was
shuttered despite Google's practically infinite pool of resources. We
celebrated as Flash (and Shockwave before it) were killed off by Apple's
stubbornness, but I have yet to see an HTML5 driven site that has a depth and
quality of content that holds up to Homestar Runner.

I agree with what Dan Nosowitz wrote in his article: ["I Don't Know How to
Waste Time on the Internet Anymore."](https://nymag.com/intelligencer/2018/05/i-dont-know-how-to-waste-time-on-the-internet-anymore.html)
This place feels less fun. It feels less _social_.  Among all the polish
something massive has been lost, and I refuse to believe it's just that I've
gotten older. Something has clearly changed.

Take blogging on Medium. They're currently in an identity crisis as to whether
they're a platform like Blogger that just lets people post things or a more
full-fledged publisher like The New York Times that has a consistent style and
reviews and promotes their writers' content. The end result is a mess. One one
hand, individual article authors are depersonalized like you'd expect from a
full-fledged publisher, restricted to a byline and an end-of-article blurb with
limited options for content customization. On the other, their review process
is extremely lax, with no real attention given to article content beyond a
passing glance[^5].

I don't feel like I own the articles I publish on Medium. When I read other
people's articles, I don't really register them as being _theirs_. It's just
another Medium article. In exchange for being distributed on a platform that
might give me exposure, I give up that exposure actually being mine at all. The
same thing happens with tweets, or reddit posts, or pretty much any shared
content—the content becomes "this thing I saw on Twitter" and not "this thing
Sarah shared." We're losing the individuality of the web[^6].

It doesn't have to be like this[^7].

[^4]: OK this one really bothers me. Most wikis have an open license allowing
    their content to be freely used; this is kind of necessary since other
    people are going to edit it. This also allowed Wikia (or Wikia users) to
    effectively clone wikis like _The Vault_, a Fallout wiki, _WikiHack_, a
    NetHack wiki, or _The Unofficial Elder Scrolls Pages_, an Elder Scrolls
    wiki.  Combined with Wikia's better SEO, new users would find the Wikia
    version, and the niche but loved versions of these wikis eventually died
    off for lack of users, replaced by the autoplaying video ad nightmare
    hellscape that is "Fandom." I do not say this lightly: Fuck Wikia.

[^5]: My highly technical, many sources cited, "22 minute read" Chernobyl
    article was selected as a featured article within an hour of publication,
    which was on a weekend afternoon. It wasn't so much reviewed or edited as
    spot-checked. Medium also doesn't claim the curation process is an
    editorial process at all.

[^6]: It's easier to associate content with people we already know, but that's
    not the only thing I'm talking about.

[^7]: [Killer Whales](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ccztRby3FAk)

## Transforming the Web

Chris Ferdinandi is right: [the web is not
dying](https://gomakethings.com/the-web-is-not-dying/)[^8]. It's changing in
many ways—and so are we. I think it would be a huge mistake to look at
everything exactly as it is now and assume it's a good predictor for where
we'll be in ten years. If we'd done that in 2004, we'd have expected more
animation effects that follow our cursors and longer shitty flash intros, but
in 2004, we didn't even have a billion people online, and now we have over half
the world's population[^9].

Serving a few hundred people is effectively free, serving a few million costs
quite a bit of money, especially when you've got a huge engineering team trying
out new features and venture capital investors pressuring you to grow even
more. So the platforms that serve millions or billions of people have to
monetize, and as they race each other to the bottom to squeeze out a bit more
ad revenue, they're dragging us down too.

The last fifteen years haven't just seen the rise of massive platforms, though.
We've also seen it get increasingly easier to make content of our own. There
are tools like Squarespace and Wix for making websites without knowledge of
HTML and CSS. If you want to learn those, tons of well written tutorials and
documentation exists, from sites like MDN and W3Schools[^10] to developer
blogs. You can host for free with services like GitHub Pages or Netlify[^11].

What if the solution isn't for Twitter and Facebook to find new avenues of
revenue but for us to stop leaning so heavily on them? Discord servers can
capture the feel of old IRC servers and channels. Web forums still exist; the
specialized ones have managed to survive. People are still running their own
blogs, and some of the _best_ writing on the internet is happening on
them[^12].

I'm trying to participate more in this side of the internet. I'm going back to
RSS readers and exploring alternatives to them—I've seen several people using
email subscriptions to good effect. I'm forcing myself not to engage with the
days-long backlog of unread messages on my Slacks and Discords and just stay in
the moment. I'm seeking out smaller communities organized around a purpose.

I made this website to be something of the antithesis of the major websites:
static HTML and CSS, mostly written from scratch, works without JavaScript, no
advertising, and absolutely no user tracking whatsoever. For me, that's
entirely worth the small amount of additional effort[^13]. Maybe less people
overall will read my words[^14], but if those people get more out of them, it
will have been worth it.

As I explore all of this, I find that I'm not alone, not even a little bit.
There is so much great content out there. The internet I'm dreaming of doesn't
seem like an ambition anymore, but an inevitability. I hope you'll join me on
it.

[^8]: I'll cop to being a little frustrated when I read Chris's article, as I'd
    already started drafting mine and Chris says a lot of what I'm trying to
    say way better than I do.

[^9]: The sources I looked at to confirm this was somewhat accurate sounding
    are https://www.internetworldstats.com/emarketing.htm,
    https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Pages/stat/default.aspx, and a
    handful of Wikipedia pages. I couldn't find a really solid source, and I
    find it hilarious that my article about the internet of the '90's is citing
    a source that looks like it's from then, but it's a vague enough claim as
    presented here that I'm comfortable with its accuracy, if not its
    precision.  Still, if you have a better source, please send it along!

[^10]: W3Schools has improved a lot; as recently as 2011 it was so bad that a
    bunch of developers made the website W3Fools to point out all the serious
    errors on the site.

[^11]: This website is built with [Hugo](https://gohugo.io/) and hosted for free
    through [Netlify](https://www.netlify.com/). The only fee associated with
    this site is the $12/year I pay for the domain name.

[^12]: I can't imagine the [Jepsen](https://aphyr.com/tags/jepsen) series or
    [Julia Evan's zines](https://wizardzines.com/) having the same feel on
    Medium.

[^13]: Plus the effort is fun!

[^14]: Without user tracking, I have no way of even knowing how many people are
    reading. I'm starting to think that's healthy.
