+++
title = "A New Dream of the Old Web"
publish = true
date = 2020-01-31
+++

I grew up on the internet. I've watched it change in so many ways. I hear the
soothsayers cry out about its impending death. If I'm being entirely honest, I
share most of the underlying concerns being expressed—except for one. I believe
the internet isn't dying. It's just waiting for us.

## In Defense of Screens

Growing up online isn't all that different from cliched teen movies. I had the
same long and serious conversations with friends about life and growing up,
it's just that mine were mostly captured in AIM chat logs[^1]. Instead of hanging
out under bleachers or trying to sneak into movie theaters, I'd bounce around
random websites I found, read blogs, or binge through a black hole of wiki
articles. The internet represented pure freedom—not just because the content
was free, but because it felt like the space belonged to us.

As I got older, it wasn't just a space to hang out with my IRL friends. I met
people on web forums, IRC channels, and MUDs (text-based multiplayer games). I
wrote and shared stories, and got feedback from people who were writers in real
life. I asked questions about how computers worked and got answers from
professional software engineers[^2]. I met people my own age who lived in different
states and countries. Alongside all these friends I designed entire worlds,
shared music videos and funny animations I enjoyed, and played games, but most
of all, I chatted.

[^1]: Mercifully, those have been lost to time.

[^2]: It was through these conversations that I learned that "Computer Science"
    was a thing I could major in at college and that programming was a job I
    could have as an adult.

I love the internet. Today I keep hearing that screens are bad; they're ruining
our attention spans, causing constant FOMO, and making kids anti-social. The
internet of the mid-2000s did none of this to me. I had deep conversations
online that took my entire focus. Socializing was the point. So what went
wrong? How can the technology that enabled all of this be inherently bad?

## Dark Patterns

The internet we have today appears superficially similar to my early internet
experiences, but a lot has changed. Facebook is like MySpace except there's no
custom HTML or CSS so all the content looks exactly the same. Messenger and
Hangouts are like AIM except again, there's no customization, and you can't use
an external client. Slack and Discord are like IRC except there's always
history from when you weren't online making it hard not to spend tons of time
trying to "catch up" instead of just dropping in on the current conversations.
Reddit is like...well, early Reddit, except more of the content seems to be
self-posts, imgur hosted images, and gify hosted gifs that don't require you to
leave the site at all.

In the meantime, the websites that have stuck around from them have drastically
changed in ways that impede what they once were. Facebook and Twitter's content
distribution algorithms have replaced the serendipity of real-time updates.
Google's ads are increasingly trying to blend in with native search results and
now frequently take up more than half of the first page of results.
Wikia/Fandom has actively murdered niche content wikis, often against their
will, and no one seems to care.

And then there's the things that are just gone. I don't really think there's a
good modern alternative to StumbleUpon for just wasting time. Google Reader was
shuttered despite Google's seemingly infinite pool of resources. We celebrated
as Flash (and Shockwave before it) were killed off by Apple's stubbornness, but
I have yet to see an HTML5 driven site that has the depth and brilliance of
Homestar Runner.

I agree with what Dan Nosowitz wrote in his article: "I Don't Know How to Waste
Time on the Internet Anymore." This place feels less fun. It feels less social.
Between the polish and the dark patterns, something massive has been lost, and
I refuse to believe it's just that I've gotten older.

It doesn't have to be like this.

## Transforming the Web

Chris Ferdinandi is right: the web is not dying. It's changing in many ways,
and so are we. I think it would be a huge mistake to look at everything exactly
as it is now and assume it's a good predictor for where we'll be in ten years.
If we'd done that in 2004, we'd have expected more animation effects that
follow our cursors and longer shitty flash intros, but in 2004, we didn't even
have a billion people online, and now we have over half the world's population.

The early websites had to figure out how to monetize. Serving a few hundred
people is effectively free, serving a few million costs quite a bit of money,
especially when you've got a huge engineering team trying out new features and
venture capital investors pressuring you to grow even more. Advertising, which
was once the obvious choice, seems like a bit of a race to the bottom, and it's
dragged us down with it.

Take Medium, for instance. They're currently in an identity crisis as to
whether they're a platform like Blogger that just lets people post things or a
more full-fledged publisher like The New York Times that has a consistent style
and reviews and promotes their writers' content. The end result is a mess. One
one hand, individual article authors are depersonalized like you'd expect from
a full-fledged publisher, restricted to a byline and an end-of-article blurb
with limited options content customization. On the other, their review process
is pseudo-optional and extremely lax, with no real attention given to article
content beyond a passing glance.

The end result is that when I write articles on Medium I don't quite feel like
I own them anymore. In exchange for being distributed on a platform that might
give me exposure, I give up that exposure actually being mine at all. The same
thing happens with tweets, or reddit posts, or pretty much any shared
content—the content becomes "this thing I saw on Twitter" and not "this thing
Sarah shared." We're losing the core social connections, mostly so that ads can
feel the same as native content.

The retort here is that these websites have to monetize, because being on the
internet is expensive. It's true—if we're talking about platforms that serve
millions or billions of people. The last fifteen years haven't just seen the
rise of platforms like these, though. We've also seen it get increasingly
easier to make content of our own. There are tools like Squarespace and Wix for
making websites without knowledge of HTML and CSS. If you want to learn those,
tons of well written tutorials and documentation exists, from sites like MDN
and W3Schools to developer blogs. You can host for free with services like
GitHub Pages or Netilfy.

What if the solution to the "monetization problem" isn't for Twitter and
Facebook to find new avenues of revenue but for us to stop leaning so heavily
on massive platforms? What if we're already doing just that? Discord servers
seem to slowly be restoring the feel of old IRC channels. Web forums still
exist; the specialized ones have managed to survive. People are still running
their own blogs, and some of the best writing on the internet is happening on
them.

For my part, I'm trying to participate more in this bespoke side of the
internet. This website is something of the antithesis of the major websites:
static HTML and CSS, handwritten, works without JavaScript, no advertising, and
absolutely no user tracking whatsoever. That's worth the small amount of
additional effort it takes me to keep this up.

I'm going back to RSS readers and exploring alternatives to them (I've seen
several people using email subscriptions to good effect). I'm forcing myself
not to engage with the days of unread messages on my Slacks and Discords and
just stay in the moment. And I'm seeking out the niche communities organized
around a purpose so that my words aren't all just lost in the noise. Maybe less
people overall will read them, but if those people get more out of them, it
will have been worth it.

The internet I'm dreaming of doesn't seem like a lost ambition anymore, but an
inevitability. I hope you'll join me on it.

